JUDY WOODRUFF: After days of
setbacks, a Cabinet
nominee dropping out, a resigned
national
security adviser, and a court
rejection of
his travel ban, President Trump
went on the
offensive today.
At a 77-minute-long news
conference, he rejected
charges of ties between his
campaign and Russia,
blasted the intelligence
community for leaks,
and repeatedly attacked the news
media.
The president said he inherited
a mess at
home and abroad, but he
dismissed the notion
of a White House in turmoil.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
I turn on the TV, open the
newspapers and
I see stories of chaos.
Chaos.
Yet it is the exact opposite.
This administration is running
like a fine-tuned
machine, despite the fact that I
can't get
my Cabinet approved.
Let me list to you some of the
things that
we've done in just a short
period of time.
I just got here.
And I got here with no Cabinet.
Again, each of these actions is
a promise
I made to the American people.
So, I will go over just some of
them.
And we have a lot happening next
week and
in the weeks --in the weeks
coming.
We've withdrawn from the
job-killing disaster
known as Trans-Pacific
Partnership.
We're going to make trade deals,
but we're
going to have one-on-one deals,
bilateral.
We've undertaken the most
substantial border
security measures in a
generation to keep
our nation and our tax dollars
safe, and are
now in the process of beginning
to build a
promised wall on the southern
border.
The price is going to come down
just like
it has on everything else I have
negotiated
for the government.
And we are going to have a wall
that works.
We're not going to have a wall
like they have
now, which is either nonexistent
or a joke.
We've begun preparing to repeal
and replace
Obamacare.
Obamacare is a disaster, folks.
It's disaster.
I know you can say, oh,
Obamacare.
I mean, they fill up our alleys
with people
that you wonder how they get
there, but they
are not the Republican people
our that representatives
are representing.
So we've begun preparing to
repeal and replace
Obamacare, and are deep in the
midst of negotiations
on a very historic tax reform to
bring our
jobs back, to bring our jobs
back to this
country, big league.
It's already happening, but big
league.
I have kept my promise to the
American people
by nominating a justice of the
United States
Supreme Court, Judge Neil
Gorsuch, who is
from my list of 20, and who will
be a true
defender of our laws and our
Constitution,
highly respected, should get the
votes from
the Democrats.
You may not see that.
But he'll get there one way or
the other.
This last month has represented
an unprecedented
degree of action on behalf of
the great citizens
of our country.
Again, I say it.
There has never been a
presidency that's done
so much in such a short period
of time.
And we have not even started the
big work
yet.
That starts early next week.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The president
also faced
repeated questions about Russian
contacts
with officials in his campaign
and about firing
National Security Adviser Mike
Flynn.
The Washington Post reported
this evening
Flynn denied to the FBI last
month that he
discussed lifting sanctions with
the Russian
ambassador, but intercepted
communications
indicate he did.
DONALD TRUMP: Mike Flynn is a
fine person,
and I asked for his resignation.
He respectfully gave it.
He is a man who there was a
certain amount
of information given to Vice
President Pence,
who is with us today.
And I was not happy with the way
that information
was given.
He didn't have to do that,
because what he
did wasn't wrong -- what he did
in terms of
the information he saw.
What was wrong was the way that
other people,
including yourselves in this
room, were given
that information, because that
was classified
information that was given
illegally.
That's the real problem.
QUESTION: What will you do on
the leaks?
You've said twice today...
DONALD TRUMP: Yes, we're looking
at them very
-- very, very serious.
I have gone to all of the folks
in charge
of the various agencies, and
we're -- I have
actually called the Justice
Department to
look into the leaks.
Those are criminal leaks.
They're put out by people either
in agencies
-- I think you'll see it
stopping because
now we have our people in.
You know, again, we don't have
our people
in because we can't get them
approved by the
Senate.
QUESTION: Did you direct Mike
Flynn to discuss
sanctions with the Russian
ambassador...
DONALD TRUMP: No, I didn't.
QUESTION: ... prior to your...
QUESTION: ... inauguration?
DONALD TRUMP: No, I didn't.
QUESTION: And then fired him...
DONALD TRUMP: Excuse me.
(CROSSTALK)
DONALD TRUMP: No, I fired him
because of what
he said to Mike Pence.
Very simple.
Mike was doing his job.
He was calling countries and his
counterparts.
So, it certainly would have been
OK with me
if he did it.
I would have directed him to do
it if I thought
he wasn't doing it.
I didn't direct him, but I would
have directed
him because that's his job.
QUESTION: During the campaign,
did anyone
from your team communicate with
members of
the Russian government or
Russian intelligence?
And, if so, what was the nature
of those conversations?
DONALD TRUMP: And I can tell
you, speaking
for myself, I own nothing in
Russia.
I have no loans in Russia.
I don't have any deals in
Russia.
President Putin called me up
very nicely to
congratulate me on the win of
the election.
He then called me up extremely
nicely to congratulate
me on the inauguration, which
was terrific.
But so did many other leaders,
almost all
other leaders from almost all of
the countries.
So that's the extent.
Russia is fake news.
Russia -- this is fake news put
out by the
media.
The false reporting by the
media, by you people,
the false, horrible, fake
reporting makes
it much harder to make a deal
with Russia.
And probably Putin said, you
know -- he's
sitting behind his desk, and
he's saying,
you know, I see what's going on
in the United
States.
I follow it closely.
It's going to be impossible for
President
Trump to ever get along with
Russia because
of all the pressure he's got
with this fake
story, OK?
QUESTION: Is Putin testing you,
do you believe,
sir?
DONALD TRUMP: No, I don't think
so.
I think Putin probably assumes
that he can't
make a deal with me anymore
because politically
it would be unpopular for a
politician to
make a deal.
I can't believe I'm saying I'm a
politician,
but I guess that's what I am
now.
Because, look, it would be much
easier for
me to be tough on Russia, but
then we're not
going to make a deal.
Now, I don't know that we're
going to make
a deal.
I don't know.
We might.
We might not.
But it would be much easier for
me to be so
tough -- the tougher I am on
Russia, the better.
But you know what?
I want to do the right thing for
the American
people.
And to be honest, secondarily, I
want to do
the right thing for the world.
QUESTION: I was just hoping that
we could
get a yes-or-no answer on one of
these questions
involving Russia.
Can you say whether you are
aware that anyone
who advised your campaign had
contacts with
Russia during the course of the
election?
DONALD TRUMP: Well, I told you,
General Flynn
obviously was dealing.
So that's one person.
But he was dealing, as he should
have been.
QUESTION: During the election?
DONALD TRUMP: No.
Nobody that I know of.
Nobody...
QUESTION: So you're not aware of
any contact
during the course...
DONALD TRUMP: Look, look,
look...
QUESTION: ... of the election?
DONALD TRUMP: How many times do
I have to
answer this question?
QUESTION: Can you just say yes
or no?
DONALD TRUMP: Russia is a ruse.
I know you have to get up and
ask a question.
It's so important.
But Russia is a ruse.
I have nothing to do with
Russia.
Haven't made a phone call to
Russia in years.
Don't speak to people from
Russia.
Not that I wouldn't.
I just have nobody to speak to.
I spoke to Putin twice.
He called me on the election.
I told you this.
And he called me on the
inauguration, a few
days ago.
We had a very good talk,
especially the second
one, lasted for a pretty long
period of time.
I'm sure you probably get it
because it was
classified.
So I'm sure everybody in this
room perhaps
has it.
But we had a very, very good
talk.
I have nothing to do with
Russia.
To the best of my knowledge, no
person that
I deal with does.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mr. Trump also
defended his
ban on travelers from seven
mostly Muslim
nations.
It's been blocked in federal
court.
Today, the Justice Department
announced that
the order will be rescinded.
The president said that a new
one is coming,
and he addressed the fate of
immigrant children
shielded from deportation under
the so-called
DACA program.
DONALD TRUMP: Let me tell you
about the travel
ban.
We had a very smooth rollout of
the travel
ban.
But we had a bad court.
Got a bad decision.
We had a court that's been
overturned.
Again, may be wrong, but I think
it's 80 percent
of the time, a lot.
We had a bad decision.
We're going to keep going with
that decision.
We're going to put in a new
executive order
next week some time.
But we had a bad decision.
Now, what I wanted to do was do
the exact
same executive order, but said
one thing.
I said this to my people.
Give them a one-month period of
time.
But General Kelly, now Secretary
Kelly, said,
if you do that, all these people
will come
in a month, the bad ones.
You do agree there are bad
people out there,
right, that not everybody that's
like you.
You have some bad people out
there.
So, Kelly said you can't do
that.
And he was right.
As soon as he said it I said,
wow, never thought
of it.
I said how about one week?
He said, no good.
You got to do it immediately,
because, if
you do it immediately, they
don't have time
to come in.
Now, nobody ever reports that.
But that's why we did it
quickly.
LISA DESJARDINS: Can you give us
more details
on the executive order you plan
for next week?
Even its broad outlines?
DONALD TRUMP: Yes.
LISA DESJARDINS: Will it be
focused on specific...
DONALD TRUMP: It's a very fair
question.
LISA DESJARDINS: .. countries?
And, in addition, on the DACA
program for
immigration.
DONALD TRUMP: Right.
LISA DESJARDINS: What is your
plan?
Do you plan to continue that
program or to
end it?
DONALD TRUMP: We're going to
show great heart.
DACA is a very, very difficult
subject for
me, I will tell you.
To me, it's one of the most
difficult subjects
I have, because you have these
incredible
kids, in many cases, not in all
cases.
In some of the cases, they're
having DACA,
and they're gang members, and
they're drug
dealers, too.
But you have some absolutely
incredible kids,
I would say mostly.
And they were brought here in
such a way -- it's
a very -- it's a very, very
tough subject.
We're going to deal with DACA
with heart.
I have to deal with a lot of
politicians,
don't forget, and I have to
convince them
that what I'm saying is -- is
right.
And I appreciate your
understanding on that.
But the DACA situation is a
very, very -- it's
a very difficult thing for me,
because, you
know, I love these kids.
I love kids.
I have kids and grandkids.
And I find it very, very hard
doing what the
law says exactly to do, and you
know, the
law is rough.
I'm not talking about new laws.
I'm talking the existing law is
very rough.
It's very, very rough.
As far as the new order, the new
order is
going to be very much tailored
to the -- what
I consider to be a very bad
decision.
But we can tailor the order to
that decision
and get just about everything,
in some ways
more.
But we're tailoring it now to
the decision,
we have some of the best lawyers
in the country
working on it.
And the new executive order is
being tailored
to the decision we got down from
the court.
OK?
HARI SREENIVASAN: On Russia and
other topics,
the president's scorn of news
coverage was
on full display.
He insisted news organizations
are giving
a skewed, negative view of his
actions and
are woefully out of touch with
the country.
DONALD TRUMP: Many of our
nation's reporters
and folks will not tell you the
truth, and
will not treat the wonderful
people of our
country with the respect that
they deserve.
And I hope, going forward, we
can be a little
bit -- a little bit different,
and maybe get
along a little bit better, if
that's possible.
Maybe it's not, and that's OK,
too.
Unfortunately, much of the media
in Washington,
D.C., along with New York, Los
Angeles, in
particular, speaks not for the
people, but
for the special interests and
for those profiting
off a very, very obviously
broken system.
The press has become so
dishonest that, if
we don't talk about it, we are
doing a tremendous
disservice to the American
people.
Tremendous disservice.
We have to talk about it, to
find out what's
going on, because the press
honestly is out
of control.
The level of dishonesty is out
And I will tell you something.
I will be honest, because I sort
of enjoy
this back and forth, and I guess
I have all
my life, but I have never seen
more dishonest
media than, frankly, the
political media.
I thought the financial media
was much better,
much more honest.
But I will say that I never get
phone calls
from the media.
QUESTION: You said that the
leaks are real,
but the news is fake.
I guess I don't understand.
It seems that there's a
disconnect there.
If the information coming from
those leaks
is real, then how can the
stories be fake?
DONALD TRUMP: The reporting is
fake.
Look, look...
(CROSSTALK)
DONALD TRUMP: You know what it
is?
Here's the thing.
The public isn't -- you know,
they read newspapers,
they see television, they watch.
They don't know if it's true or
false, because
they're not involved.
I'm involved.
I've been involved with this
stuff all my
life.
But I'm involved.
So, I know when you're telling
the truth or
when you're not.
I just see many, many untruthful
things.
And I will tell you what else I
see.
I see tone.
You know the word tone.
The tone is such hatred.
I'm really not a bad person, by
the way.
No, but the tone is such -- I do
get good
ratings, you have to admit that
-- the tone
is such hatred.
You look at your show that goes
on at 10:00
the evening.
You just take a look at that
show.
That is a constant hit.
The panel is almost always
exclusive anti-Trump.
The good news is, he doesn't
have good ratings.
But the panel is almost
exclusive anti-Trump.
And the hatred and venom coming
from his mouth,
the hatred coming from other
people on your
network.
Now, I will say this.
I'm actually having a very good
time, OK?
But they will take this news
conference -- don't
forget, that's the way I won.
Remember, I used to give you a
news conference
every time I made a speech,
which was like
every day.
Tomorrow, they will say, Donald
Trump rants
and raves at the press.
I'm not ranting and raving.
I'm just telling you.
You know, you're dishonest
people.
But -- but I'm not ranting and
raving.
I love this.
I'm having a good time doing it.
But, tomorrow, the headlines are
going to
be, Donald Trump rants and
raves.
Look, I want to see an honest
press.
When I started off today by
saying that it's
so important to the public to
get an honest
press.
The press -- the public doesn't
believe you
people anymore.
Now, maybe I had something to do
with that.
I don't know.
But they don't believe you.
If you were straight and really
told it like
it is, as Howard Cosell used to
say, right?
Of course, he had some questions
also.
But, if you were straight, I
would be your
biggest booster.
I would be your biggest fan in
the world,
including bad stories about me.
But if you go -- as an example,
you're CNN.
I mean, it's story after story
after story
is bad.
I won.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The president
went on to say,
"This is going to be a bad
question," before
calling on reporter April Ryan
of American
Urban Radio Networks.
APRIL RYAN, American Urban Radio
Networks:
When you say the inner cities,
are you going
-- are you going to include the
CBC, Mr. President,
in your conversations with your
-- your urban
agenda, your inner city agenda,
as well as...
DONALD TRUMP: Am I going to
include who?
APRIL RYAN: Are you going to
include the Congressional
Black Caucus and the
Congressional...
DONALD TRUMP: Well, I would.
I tell you what.
Do you want to set up the
meeting?
APRIL RYAN: ... Hispanic Caucus?
DONALD TRUMP: Do you want to set
up the meeting?
APRIL RYAN: No -- no -- no.
I'm not...
DONALD TRUMP: Are they friends
of yours?
APRIL RYAN: I'm just a reporter.
DONALD TRUMP: Well, then, set up
the meeting.
APRIL RYAN: I know some of them,
but I'm sure
they're watching right now.
DONALD TRUMP: Let's go set up a
meeting.
I would love to meet with the
Black Caucus.
I think it's great, the
Congressional Black
Caucus.
I think it's great.
I actually thought I had a
meeting with Congressman
Cummings, and he was all
excited.
And then he said: Well, I can't
move.
It might be bad for me
politically.
I can't have that meeting.
I was all set to have the
meeting.
You know, we called him and
called him.
And he was all set.
I spoke to him on the phone,
very nice guy.
APRIL RYAN: I hear he wanted
that meeting
with you as well.
DONALD TRUMP: He wanted it.
HARI SREENIVASAN: For the
record, the Congressional
Black Caucus says it has been
asking to meet
with the president, but never
received a response.
That leads us to our final
highlight: an exchange
where Mr. Trump was called out
for making
another false statement.
DONALD TRUMP: We got 306,
because people came
out and voted like they've never
seen before,
so that's the way it goes.
I guess it was the biggest
Electoral College
win since Ronald Reagan.
QUESTION: You said today that
you had the
biggest electoral margin since
Ronald Reagan
with 304 -- 306 electoral votes.
In fact, President Obama got
365...
(CROSSTALK)
QUESTION: President Obama 332,
and George
H.W. Bush 426 when he won as
president.
So, why should Americans trust
you...
(CROSSTALK)
DONALD TRUMP: No, I was told --
I was given
that information.
I don't know.
I was just given it.
We had a very, very big margin.
QUESTION: I guess my question
is, why should
Americans trust you when you
have accused
the information they've received
of being
fake, when you're providing
information that
is...
DONALD TRUMP: Well, I don't
know, I was given
that information.
I was given -- actually, I've
seen that information
around.
But it was a very substantial
victory.
Do you agree with that?
QUESTION: You're the president.
DONALD TRUMP: OK.
Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And our own
Lisa Desjardins
joins us now from the White
House.
Lisa, one of the things that he
said about
General Michael Flynn, that he
wasn't hesitating
to fire him, partly because he
had a replacement
in mind.
What is the latest we know about
that?
LISA DESJARDINS: Right.
We do have some news, as it
seems we can't
get two minutes today without
more news.
CBS and The Financial Times are
reporting
that General Roger -- Robert
Harward, who
was the Trump choice to replace
Michael Flynn
-- he's a U.S. Navy SEAL, former
admiral,
retired admiral -- has declined
to take that
position.
So, that leaves a major, key
position in the
White House still to be filled.
The White House seems to be
searching.
We have asked the White House
for comment
on that.
They have not gotten back to us,
but the reporting,
that Trump's choice to replace
Flynn has declined
to take the job.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Lisa, also, at
the top of
this press conference today was
actual news
that the president wanted to
make, which was
the nomination of the
replacement candidate
for the Department of Labor.
LISA DESJARDINS: Another name,
another very
important name that was
overlooked today.
Alexander Acosta is the man who
Mr. Trump
would like lead the Labor
Department.
We know a lot about him.
He has quite a pedigree.
In fact, he has served himself
as a U.S. attorney.
He also was the first Hispanic
to serve as
an assistant attorney general,
covering civil
rights.
Also, he was on the National
Labor Relations
Board.
That in particular is important,
because that's
his main qualification, as far
as we know,
for this labor job.
Currently, he's the dean of the
College of
Law at the Florida International
University.
He would be first Hispanic on
President Trump's
Cabinet.
We're waiting for reaction from
Capitol Hill
to his name.
He is well-known here.
And one thing the White House
likes, Hari,
in particular, is that he's gone
through the
confirmation process before the
Senate three
times.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now, one of
the things I
want to follow up on is
something that you
were asking the president today.
What's happening, what is the
latest with
the executive order?
LISA DESJARDINS: Right, such a
critical piece
of information.
The president, as we played for
our audience,
said he will have a new order
out next week.
It seems that this next order is
an attempt
to almost replicate the past
order, but line
it up so that it passes some
kind of court
muster.
And it also seems, reading
between the lines
-- and I have one source
indicating that they
have not figured out exactly how
to do that
yet.
That's why it hasn't been
released yet, the
White House still designing this
executive
order.
But pay attention to Mr. Trump's
words today,
Hari.
He also said that this is
extreme vetting,
that they had to move up more
quickly because
of the Ninth Circuit ruling.
So this is something they were
looking at
more long-term that they seem to
be incorporating
into an executive order next
week.
It doesn't seem like it's all
the way fully
baked, but it's going to be
significant when
it comes.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Lisa, finally,
why did they
have this today?
Why did they have this press
conference, briefly?
LISA DESJARDINS: I think there
were a lot
of reasons, obviously, just the
headlines
themselves and the White House
struggling
to respond to them.
They wanted to get the president
out himself
to do it.
But there is also a sense in
this White House
that the president does best on
his feet and
in these kind of very engaging
formats.
And you could tell, he said
himself, as we
played, he was enjoying the
back-and-forth
with the press.
So, it was a lot of that.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Lisa
Desjardins joining
us from the White House, thanks
so much.
LISA DESJARDINS: You got it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now for two
different viewpoints
on today's news conference, I am
joined by
Kansas Secretary of State Kris
Kobach.
He was an adviser to Mr. Trump
during his
presidential campaign and
transition.
And Washington Post columnist
Ruth Marcus.
Welcome back to the program to
both of you.
Ruth, I'm going to start with
you.
This is the first sort of
wide-ranging, full-blown
news conference we have seen
from this president
in several weeks.
What did you make of it overall?
RUTH MARCUS, Columnist, The
Washington Post:
It was, as everybody has been
saying, an extraordinary
event.
And I think it had kind of three
audiences.
One audience was the president
himself.
I think he likes to do this sort
of government
by improv.
He did campaign by improv.
Now he's doing government by
improv.
You could see him enjoying
himself.
I think it made him feel better.
I think there is a core of Trump
supporters
who, as he said during the
campaign, he could
shoot somebody on Fifth Avenue.
They are not rattled by anything
they have
seen.
They're sticking with him, so
they're happy
to sort of see him back out
there being Trump.
I thought it was less successful
with the
third audience, which is the
most important.
There are a bunch of people who
are never
going to be for Trump.
Most Democrats, polls show, will
never be
for Trump.
But there are Trump voters and
others who
are kind of wigglers who I think
would be
very -- certainly not reassured
by this performance,
not being reassured by hearing
him say, contrary
to all evidence, that this is a
well-functioning
machine that they're seeing in
the beginning
of this administration.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Kansas Secretary
of State Kris
Kobach, was this a reassuring
news conference
or something else?
KRIS KOBACH (R), Kansas
Secretary of State:
I think, to many conservatives,
many Republicans,
it was reassuring, in the sense
that this
was the first time we have seen
a president,
a conservative president, really
express vocally
at a press conference the bias
he feels and
many of us feel has been given
in the coverage
toward the Trump administration.
And so he's sort of holding the
press' feet
to the fire while he's taking
their questions.
And it's combative.
It's interesting.
I think you are going to see a
lot more people
turning in to these press
conferences.
It used to be that conservatives
who were
in government, like myself, we
would get what
we felt was unfair coverage,
we'd go home,
we would grumble, we would
complain about
it, but we actually wouldn't say
anything
to the reporter or to the
reporters while
they're asking us additional
questions.
He's very confrontational.
And I think that's refreshing.
So I think it actually is going
to be good.
And I think the public is going
to take an
interest in these press
conferences much more
so than in past presidencies.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Ruth, it is the
case this president
goes on about the press
virtually every chance
he gets.
We heard that today.
It took up so much time in his
news conference.
You and I know, as somebody --
we have covered
this for a long time.
Every president feels that he
has gotten unfair,
dishonest coverage from the news
media.
Is there something
quantitatively, qualitatively
different about the coverage of
this president?
RUTH MARCUS: Absolutely, both
quantitatively
and qualitatively.
Other presidents behind the
scenes mutter
epithets about us.
He calls us the lowest form of
human life
to our face.
Other presidents tried their
best to go around
the media that they don't think
are expressing
their views.
President Trump just is -- is
just very, very
vocal about that and much more
-- spends much
more time being vocal about
that.
The question that I have --
certainly, I agree
with Kris that this is must-see
TV.
If you're interested in ratings,
if that's
the test of a successful
presidency, this
is -- we're doing great here.
I don't think that's the test.
And his basic argument was fake
-- to try
to distract from the Russia
story and the
other bumps, you're all fake
news.
But it can't simultaneously be
that we're
really upset about leaks and the
news -- that
the leaked news is fake.
And so that's where I thought
his argument
really fell short.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What about that,
Kris Kobach,
this notion that you can say all
day long
that you're getting dishonest
coverage, go
after the press, but, in the
end, does that
help him govern?
KRIS KOBACH: Sorry.
I missed -- my earpiece -- I
missed the last
part.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Does it help
President Trump
govern by spending so much time
criticizing
the news media?
KRIS KOBACH: So, that's a great
question.
I think it may.
And time will tell, because we
haven't really
seen a president challenging the
press' coverage
right after he gets it.
And let's remember, it's a mixed
bag.
There are some programs.
I think "PBS NewsHour" is very
balanced and
plays it down the middle, but
there are other
programs that do not.
And so I think we will see if it
helps him
govern.
For example, the -- let's take
the example
of the travel ban.
Now, that was characterized by
some media
outlets as a Muslim ban, which I
think is
an inaccurate term.
And I think most -- any fair
person would
agree that's inaccurate.
It's a temporary travel ban on
seven countries,
which have majority Muslim
population, but
there are many, many other
countries, the
vast majority of the Muslim
world is not covered.
And so that's an example where
he then took
the press to task, said, no,
this is not fair
coverage.
And I think there has been more
accurate coverage
since then.
So, it may help him govern, but
I think it's
going to be case by case.
In some cases, it will.
Maybe, in some cases, it won't.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Ruth, clearly,
there were a
number of other questions about
contacts between
the Trump campaign and Russia.
He repeatedly said he wasn't
aware of any
such thing.
Does that put all those
questions to rest?
RUTH MARCUS: The Trump
administration only
wishes that all those questions
are put to
rest.
What we know is that he was
briefed about
contacts between the campaign
and intelligence
officials.
He says he's not aware of any,
but there are
clearly things out there.
He got -- this story about
General Flynn,
who he says was terribly treated
by us in
the news media, yet he fired him
because he
was misleading about these
contacts.
I think we're just beginning to
get the beginnings
of the story about what has
really happened
with Russia and with General
Flynn and possibly
with the Trump campaign.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Secretary Kris
Kobach, again
secretary of state of Kansas,
what about this
Russia question, just quickly?
We did hear, as Ruth just said,
the president
said, I would have told my
national security
adviser to be -- to go ahead and
talk to the
Russian ambassador about
sanctions.
But, if that's the case, why was
that something
that we now know -- or
apparently Michael
Flynn didn't level with the vice
president
and others about?
KRIS KOBACH: I think I heard the
question.
Correct me.
And, again, I apologize for the
earpiece.
Look, I think the president is
relating what
he remembers and what he has
understood to
be the communications that he's
aware of.
And I think he was very clear,
and I think
it's correct, that the reasons
for Mr. Flynn's
departure -- General Flynn's
departure were
a matter of trust, not a matter
of any violation
of any law or a regulation.
So, I do think this particular
one is being
perhaps blown -- and I think the
president
was frustrated by the press
coverage, which
really seems to be making quite
a mountain
out of maybe not a molehill, but
not a mountain,
blowing this particular
personnel question
way out of proportion.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, he went on
for an hour
and 17 minutes.
Much more to discuss.
Thank you both for being here,
Ruth Marcus,
Kansas Secretary of State Kris
Kobach.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In the day's
other news:
The Senate narrowly confirmed
Congressman
Mick Mulvaney to run the White
House Budget
Office.
The Tea Party conservative from
South Carolina
was approved 51-49.
Senator John McCain joined all
48 Democrats
in voting no because of
Mulvaney's support
for defense spending cuts.
The new budget chief also favors
trimming
entitlement programs like
Medicare and Social
Security.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The president's
nominee for
ambassador to Israel says he's
sorry for some
of his fiery rhetoric.
David Friedman apologized today
for inflammatory
criticism of President Obama and
Hillary Clinton
and for calling a liberal Jewish
group -- quote
-- "worse than kapos."
That was a reference to Jews who
helped the
Nazis.
But several Democratic senators
challenged
Friedman over his language, as
they grilled
him at his confirmation hearing.
SEN.
BEN CARDIN (D), Maryland: The
diplomat has
to choose every word that he or
she uses.
So, why should I believe that
these were just
emotional expressions and that
you now understand
the difference between that role
and that
as a diplomat?
DAVID FRIEDMAN, U.S. Ambassador
to Israel
Nominee: If you want me to
rationalize it
or justify it, I cannot.
These were hurtful words.
And I deeply regret them.
They're not reflective of my
nature or my
character.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Friedman has
strongly backed
Israeli settlements and opposed
Palestinian
statehood.
But, today, he said he'd be
delighted if a
two-state solution can be
achieved.
Meanwhile, the head of the Arab
League today
warned against moving the U.S.
Embassy to
Jerusalem.
He said it would be explosive
for the situation
in the Middle East.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Islamic State
bombers carried
out two deadly strikes today,
killing 130
people.
In Southern Pakistan, a suicide
bomber blew
himself up at a famous Sufi
Muslim shrine.
At least 75 people died there,
and hundreds
more were wounded.
Hours earlier, in Iraq, a car
bomb ripped
through a Shiite neighborhood in
Baghdad.
The death toll there was at
least 55.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In Russia, a
Kremlin spokesman
warned today that political
turmoil in Washington
has put a damper on improving
relations with
U.S.
And President Vladimir Putin
called for restoring
contacts between U.S. and
Russian intelligence
agencies.
But at NATO headquarters in
Brussels, Defense
Secretary James Mattis said the
U.S. is not
ready for any military
collaboration.
JAMES MATTIS, U.S. Secretary of
Defense: Our
political leaders will engage
and try to find
common ground or a way forward
where Russia,
living up to its commitments,
will return
to a partnership of sorts here
with NATO.
But Russia is going to have to
prove itself
first and live up to the
commitments they
have made in the Russia-NATO
agreement.
JUDY WOODRUFF: At the same time,
Mattis said
there is very little doubt that
the Russians
have interfered with elections
in a number
of countries.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Authorities in
Malaysia
have arrested two more suspects
in the assassination
of Kim Jong-nam, the North
Korean leader's
half-brother.
He was attacked Monday at a
Malaysian airport.
Local news accounts say North
Korean agents
poisoned him, but results of an
autopsy have
not been released.
North Korea's Kim Jong-un is
widely suspected
of ordering the murder.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Back in this
country, production
workers at Boeing's plant in
South Carolina
have rejected an effort to
unionize, for the
second time.
The aircraft maker had
campaigned for weeks
against efforts to organize its
plant in North
Charleston.
President Trump plans to visit
the facility
tomorrow.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Stocks were
mixed on Wall
Street today.
The Dow Jones industrial average
gained nearly
eight points to close at 20619.
The Nasdaq fell four points, and
the S&P 500
slipped two.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And a
game-changer from the
people who make "Monopoly."
The thimble is out.
Hasbro says players voted out
the piece that's
been part of the classic board
game since
1935.
Now they're voting on a
replacement.
The candidates include monster
trucks and
flip-flops.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Still to come
on the "NewsHour":
what's causing more white men to
die in middle
age; sanctuary cities take a
stand against
the president's immigration
policies; and
an English professor's take on
her own life
as an immigrant.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now a look at a
demographic
trend that is surprising the
experts.
Despite decades of advancements
in health
care, diet and safety,
middle-aged white Americans
are now living shorter, not
longer, lives.
Our economics correspondent
reports in the
latest installment of Making
Sense.
PAUL SOLMAN: Maysville,
Kentucky, in the northeast
corner of the state, just a
short bridge away
from Ohio, despite some
merchants' best efforts
at cosmopolitan outreach, the
downtown is
struggling.
But at one local establishment,
business is
brisk and growing.
DAVID LAWRENCE, Mason County
Coroner: This
is the Batesville 20-gauge steel
protector.
PAUL SOLMAN: This one is
Churchill blue.
DAVID LAWRENCE: Churchill blue.
We can get this in a misty rose
for the ladies.
PAUL SOLMAN: David Lawrence
manages the Knox
& Brothers Funeral Home, is also
the county
coroner.
He's been seeing a lot of dead
white males
of late, especially ages 45 to
54.
DAVID LAWRENCE: A lot of it due
to alcohol
or drug abuse.
DR.
WILLIAM CRAIG DENHAM, Family
Physician: There
has been a Denham practicing
medicine.
PAUL SOLMAN: Craig Denham wears
multiple hats
too.
DR.
WILLIAM CRAIG DENHAM: This small
bag is my
grandfather's medical kit.
PAUL SOLMAN: A fifth-generation
Kentucky family
physician.
DR.
WILLIAM CRAIG DENHAM: My
great-great-grandfather's.
PAUL SOLMAN: He's also medical
director for
the fire department's emergency
service.
DR.
WILLIAM CRAIG DENHAM: In the
past two, two-and-a-half
years, we have had about a 300
percent increase
in the drug-related overdose
ambulance runs.
And the prevalence of opiate
addiction in
this area continues to increase.
BECKY MANNING, Widow: He's like,
mom, it's
nothing that you did.
It's me.
PAUL SOLMAN: Becky Manning's son
got hooked
on drugs.
Fortunately, he's still alive.
BECKY MANNING: Almost 40 now.
PAUL SOLMAN: But she blames the
drugs in part
for her husband's suicide.
BECKY MANNING: He just carried
this tremendous
guilt for everything, for our
son doing drugs.
Then he started getting
depressed, and then
my husband took his own life.
PAUL SOLMAN: How did he do it?
BECKY MANNING: He blew his head
off.
I came home to that.
PAUL SOLMAN: Best friend Marcy
Conner's husband
also killed himself.
MARCY CONNER, Widow: He
developed alcoholism
very young in life.
PAUL SOLMAN: An addiction he
shared with lifelong
friends.
MARCY CONNER: One died with a
heart attack,
but drug use and alcohol use
played all the
way through his life.
Another one died of cancer,
drank up to the
very end.
And my husband actually had a
G-tube in, a
feeding tube in, and poured
alcohol down his
feeding tube until he died.
BECKY MANNING: Alcohol
poisoning.
PAUL SOLMAN: These cases fit a
disturbing
national pattern.
Though U.S. life expectancy has
been going
up steadily over the last
century, there's
now been a sudden and dramatic
reversal, for
just one demographic.
ANNE CASE, Economist: White
non-Hispanics
in America, middle-age, are
dying in large
numbers.
ANGUS DEATON, Economist: It was
certainly
a huge surprise to me.
PAUL SOLMAN: Economists Angus
Deaton and Anne
Case, who are married, published
their finding
just after Deaton won the 2015
Nobel Prize
in economics.
The paper showed that, starting
in 1999, the
death rate of middle-aged white
Americans
has been going up, instead of
down.
ANGUS DEATON: We thought we must
have made
an error.
I mean, the whole world is
getting better.
This middle-aged group is the
one that's benefited
most, at least since 1970, from
advances in
the treatment of heart disease,
from people
quitting smoking, all of those
things.
And then suddenly for this trend
that's going
down just to reverse out seemed
like it had
to be wrong.
But it wasn't wrong.
PAUL SOLMAN: The big increase
was in what
Case calls deaths of despair,
alcohol-related
liver disease, suicide, drug
overdose.
ANNE CASE: People kill
themselves slowly with
alcohol or drugs, or quickly
with a gun.
For people aged 50-55, for
example, those
rates went from 40 per 100,000
to 80 per 100,000
since the turn of the century.
And it's people with a high
school degree
or less who are killing
themselves in these
ways in large numbers.
That's the group that's getting
hammered.
DR.
ELLEN KUMLER, Mason County
Health Department:
And now the CDC is paying more
attention to
that age group and demographic.
PAUL SOLMAN: Ellen Kumler, a
public health
doctor for Mason County,
Kentucky, says the
latest data from the Centers for
Disease Control
pick up where the Case-Deaton
study leaves
off.
DR.
ELLEN KUMLER: When we look at
the suicide
rate, when we look at
unintentional injuries,
a lot possibly related to
substance abuse,
as well as liver disease, the
rates of those
issues have actually increased.
PAUL SOLMAN: Marcy Conner is a
nurse specializing
in substance abuse who has
experienced deaths
of despair time and again in her
own family.
MARCY CONNER: I had a brother
that committed
suicide, also.
PAUL SOLMAN: And two cousins,
one of them
a nurse.
MARCY CONNER: And he started
telling me that
his depression medication wasn't
working as
well, and pain medication wasn't
well.
And he lost his temper at work
one night and
got fired.
PAUL SOLMAN: Got fired.
MARCY CONNER: They found him
hanging in his
garage.
PAUL SOLMAN: And the other
cousin?
MARCY CONNER: She overdosed.
PAUL SOLMAN: And why so much
drug use and
abuse?
Anne Case and Angus Deaton found
something
else in their study.
ANNE CASE: Since at least the
mid-1990s, people's
reports of pain, of sciatic
pain, of neck
pain, of lower back pain year on
year have
increased.
MAN: Our best, strongest pain
medicines are
the opioids.
PAUL SOLMAN: The mid-'90s was
also when the
opioid painkiller OxyContin was
approved by
the FDA, and began to be
marketed aggressively
to doctors.
MAN: They do not have serious
medical side
effects, and so these drugs,
which I repeat,
are our best, strongest pain
medications,
should be used much more than
they are for
patients in pain.
PAUL SOLMAN: Within five years,
the drug's
maker, Purdue Pharma, was
earning a billion-dollars-a-year
profit on OxyContin, which soon
rose to $3
billion.
As for the lack of serious side
effects?
Well, it did have one.
ANGUS DEATON: It's basically
heroin in a pill
with an FDA label on the front.
So, people get addicted to this.
ELIZABETH EASTON, Recovering
Painkiller Addict:
I started on oxycodone, or
OxyContin, in high
school.
PAUL SOLMAN: Elizabeth Easton is
now in recovery.
ELIZABETH EASTON: I unleashed
something horrid
in me many years ago from doing
one -- one
pill.
I went from taking them to
snorting them to,
yes, injecting, which is really,
really horrid.
PAUL SOLMAN: Because you have
got to have
it.
ELIZABETH EASTON: You have to.
It's the only thing that makes
you feel normal.
And it's the farthest thing from
normal.
BECKY MANNING: It controls your
life.
You're a different person.
PAUL SOLMAN: That's what Becky
Manning saw
in her son.
BECKY MANNING: Seeking and
finding the next
high was his priority, no matter
who he took
down with him.
MARCY CONNER: The brain is
telling you, I
have got to have it again.
I need more.
So that's where you end up with
that craving.
The craving ends up with, you
know, seeking
supply.
PAUL SOLMAN: And though lawsuits
and a government
crackdown have helped curb the
supply of OxyContin,
cheap heroin is more than
filling the void.
DR.
WILLIAM CRAIG DENHAM: If you
can't get your
pain pills that you're abusing,
you're going
to find the source somewhere.
And so people are turning to the
street drug
heroin, which is more dangerous,
in the sense
that you're taking something
made in somebody's
garage vs. something made in a
factory.
CHRISTOPHER RUHM, Economist: In
many areas,
it's cheaper to get high on
heroin than it
would be to get drunk.
PAUL SOLMAN: Economist Chris
Ruhm.
CHRISTOPHER RUHM: This is a
major health crisis.
I mean, drug poisonings have
become the biggest
source of preventable premature
death.
So, for example, there are more
drug poisoning
deaths than car crash deaths.
And that's quite recent.
PAUL SOLMAN: And says Dr.
Denham:
DR.
WILLIAM CRAIG DENHAM: I'm seeing
just as many
middle-aged women as I am
middle-aged men.
PAUL SOLMAN: Bucking a
century-long improvement
in white longevity.
DAVID LAWRENCE: People without
jobs and people
kind of just keeping themselves
secluded from
others.
PAUL SOLMAN: For the "PBS
NewsHour," economics
correspondent Paul Solman,
reporting grimly
from Maysville, Kentucky.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, next week,
Paul returns
to Maysville to ask the obvious
question:
Why the startling increase in
deaths in white
America?
HARI SREENIVASAN: Many
restaurants and businesses
were closed today for a national
strike called
A Day Without Immigrants.
The closures were an attempt by
participants
to show how crucial immigrants
are to American
society.
Of course, as we heard in his
press conference
today, immigration remains a
vital issue to
the president.
He campaigned promising to
deport millions
and to build a wall on the
Mexican border.
And, last week, federal
immigration raids
in at least six states arrested
hundreds.
But the immigration debate also
plays out
in the nation's so-called
sanctuary cities,
where local governments resist
cooperating
with federal immigration
officials.
The "NewsHour"'s William
Brangham went to
Austin, Texas, for a closer
look.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
I, Donald John Trump, do
solemnly swear...
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Just a few
hours after Donald
Trump was sworn in as president,
another newly
elected official, Sheriff Sally
Hernandez
of Travis County, Texas, posted
this video:
SALLY HERNANDEZ, Travis County,
Texas, Sheriff:
I'm Sally Hernandez, your Travis
County sheriff.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The video laid
out her department's
policy change, which limits
cooperation with
agents from ICE, Immigration and
Customs Enforcement.
Hernandez says she doesn't want
her deputies
to be seen as ICE agents.
SALLY HERNANDEZ: We in law
enforcement need
the cooperation of our
communities of color.
We need them to be running to
us, and not
running away from us.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Travis County,
which includes
Austin, has an estimated 100,000
undocumented
immigrants, like Felix Jimenez.
The sheriff says people like
Jimenez won't
trust police if they're
constantly afraid
of being deported.
And Jimenez agrees.
FELIX JIMENEZ, Undocumented
Immigrant (through
translator): We're afraid when
we see a police
officer.
We're Hispanic.
We could be stopped for any
reason.
The real fear that keeps me
nervous after
a long day is that I may not see
my children
because I was stopped for only a
small infraction.
SALLY HERNANDEZ: We cannot
afford to make
our communities less safe by
driving people
into the shadows.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Sheriff
Hernandez won her
election promising to take this
very action,
but her critics have pounced,
saying she's
created Texas' first sanctuary
city, and deriding
her as Sanctuary Sally.
GOV.
GREG ABBOTT (R), Texas: We will
ban sanctuary
cities in Texas.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Texas Governor
Greg Abbott
accused the sheriff of betraying
her oath,
calling her argument frivolous,
shortsighted
and dangerous.
In retaliation, the governor
started cutting
$1.5 million in grants to Travis
County.
They fund things like drug
courts and domestic
violence prevention.
GOV.
GREG ABBOTT: We are seeking
fines.
We are seeking to withdraw more
state funds.
We are seeking court orders that
compel these
officials like this sheriff to
comply with
the law or possibly go to jail
themselves.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Austin is now
among dozens
of so-called sanctuary cities
across the U.S.
While there's no official
definition for a
sanctuary city, the term
generally means local
police aren't turning in every
undocumented
immigrant to federal
authorities.
These cities have long drawn the
ire of President
Trump.
During the campaign, he
threatened all of
them.
DONALD TRUMP: Block funding for
sanctuary
cities.
We block the funding.
No more funding.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: A promise he
kept soon after
taking office.
But mayors are pushing back.
MARTY WALSH (D), Mayor of
Boston, Massachusetts:
We will not be intimidated by
the threat to
fed funding.
RAHM EMANUEL (D), Mayor of
Chicago: I want
to be clear: We're going to stay
a sanctuary
city.
BILL DE BLASIO (D), Mayor of New
York: We
are going to defend all of our
people, regardless
of where they come from and
regardless of
their documentation and status.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Back in Texas,
state legislators
are trying to pass a law making
it illegal
for any city or county to limit
cooperation
with ICE.
MAN: We are in a dangerous path
as a society,
so that's what this bill does
for
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Senate Bill 4
would require
counties to determine the
immigration status
of everyone in their custody, as
well as honor
all requests from federal
immigration officials
to detain people indefinitely.
WOMAN: We just won't criminals
who are here
illegally and committing crimes
to stay in
our state.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Both sides
testified about
the proposed law.
MAN: I do believe your bill is
unconstitutional,
on its face, actually.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: State Senator
Charles Perry
introduced Senate Bill 4.
The bill says state officials
who fail to
comply with the law would face
criminal prosecutions
and hefty fines.
CHARLES PERRY (R), Texas State
Senator: These
are attention-getters.
These are, we're going to be
serious about
uniform, consistently without
prejudice, applying
the law to everyone.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, how do
local police
interact with federal
immigration officers?
Right now, when someone is
arrested in any
location in the U.S., they're
fingerprinted,
their name is checked against
several databases,
and information is shared
electronically with
immigration officials.
DENISE GILMAN, University of
Texas Law School:
There is a federal provision
that requires
local jurisdictions to provide
information
to the federal immigration
authorities.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: That's the law
nationwide?
DENISE GILMAN: That's right.
And everybody is complying with
that.
There's really no question about
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Denise Gilman
is an immigration
law professor at the University
of Texas in
Austin.
DENISE GILMAN: The next step
then is, what
does ICE decide to do, the
federal immigration
authorities?
If ICE decides to request that
the local jurisdiction
hold onto somebody for
additional time, they
file what's called a detainer.
But the courts and the federal
government
have recognized that that's
really just a
request to local jurisdictions
to hold...
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: It's not a
legally binding
contract.
DENISE GILMAN: It's not a legal
binding contract.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: If immigration
officials
come to you and ask for and give
you one of
these detainers and say, we'd
like you to
hold these 10 people, why not
just hold all
10 of them?
SALLY HERNANDEZ: We are treating
immigration
like we do any other law
enforcement agency.
So, if somebody from another
county calls
me up and says, you have
somebody in your
custody, hold them for me, I
would ask them,
do they have a warrant?
And if they have a warrant, we
will hold them.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Why is that
warrant important?
SALLY HERNANDEZ: Because that
warrant is based
on probable cause.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Sheriff
Hernandez says she
will honor detainer requests in
cases of murder,
sexual assault and human
trafficking.
Otherwise, she is not legally
required to
hold people without warrants.
Other jurisdictions have been
sued for doing
exactly that, for violating
constitutional
due process.
So, if you're within the border
of the U.S.,
regardless of where you're from,
where you're
born or what your status is, the
Constitution
protects you?
DENISE GILMAN: That's right.
And especially when it comes to
fundamental
constitutional principles like
liberty, that
is a fundamental constitutional
principle
that is guaranteed to all
persons within the
United States, regardless of
immigration status.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: SB-4, the law
that would
in effect outlaw sanctuary
cities statewide,
has left many immigrant families
like Felix
Jimenez's on edge.
He lives with his wife, Brenda,
who is also
undocumented from Mexico, and
their daughter,
Evelyn, born in the United
States, and a citizen.
He believes undocumented people
need to speak
out.
He recently attended this rally
against SB-4.
Up until a few months ago, Felix
says he felt
he could call the police for
help, like when
he was robbed and left bloody on
the street
FELIX JIMENEZ (through
translator): I called
the police and they helped me.
I was hospitalized.
I had X-rays done.
I was in a lot of pain, and it
still hurts.
But if that law existed, I
wouldn't be able
to report the crime because of
my status.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, what do
you say to someone,
not just Sheriff Hernandez, that
having local
police be a quasi-extension of
immigration
enforcement makes their
communities less safe,
not more safe?
CHARLES PERRY: Yes.
And I think, one, that's a
dangerous logic.
So we're going to not adhere to
the law in
the name of applying the law.
So, logically, that doesn't
reconcile with
me.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Last week,
Perry's bill
passed the Texas Senate and will
be debated
in the House.
Governor Abbott has promised to
sign it.
When it passes, Sheriff
Hernandez's department
could be running against the
law.
But, in the meantime, Hernandez
has been getting
what she asked for.
ICE officials have been
providing warrants
to hold people, and her office
is honoring
them.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
William Brangham
in Austin, Texas.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally, another
installment
in our Brief But Spectacular
series.
Namwali Serpell is a
Zambian-born writer and
associate professor of English
at the University
of California, Berkeley.
Her first novel, "The Old
Drift," comes out
next year, but, here, she
describes her own
story.
NAMWALI SERPELL, Author: There
are all these
different terms for what an
immigrant is in
America, when you have the
permission to stay.
There's permanent resident,
there's resident
alien.
Immigration officials are really
funny with
me, because they look at my
permanent resident
card.
And I'm always very anxious
about this when
I'm at the -- I mean, will they
let me back
in?
Can I still be here?
I teach American literature.
And I start out all of my
courses by saying,
you might be wondering why a
Zambian citizen
and a resident alien of the
United States
is teaching you the history of
American literature.
But who better than an outsider
to teach you
about American literature?
All of the great literature of
the U.S. is
told through the story of an
outsider, Nick
Carraway in "Gatsby" or Humbert
Humbert in
"Lolita."
Being on the outside or being an
alien is
the condition of being American.
And it's a way to see the
country from within,
but also with a different
perspective.
I remember when my parents told
me we were
moving to the States.
My sisters and I were really
excited.
For me, at age 8, it was a
pretty intense
shift.
I had kids kind of making fun of
me, making
fun of my hair, making fun of my
accent.
I remember very specifically a
kid asking
me in the cafeteria in fifth
grade, what are
you, not, who are you, and not
what race are
you, but what are you?
And what she meant was, are you
black or white?
I asked my dad, my white father,
who's a psychologist.
He said: "You're a citizen of
the world.
You are human."
And that answer was very
unsatisfactory.
It was only in college that I
really started
to say I'm black, because, in
America, I'm
black, and that's how I'm
recognized.
I went back for a year to Zambia
during high
school, which was very
difficult.
Everyone was like, why do you
wear your hair
curly and natural?
They didn't like the punk rock
T-shirts I
was wearing or the big sweats
and sneaks.
I thought I was a skater chick.
People often want to say, you're
African.
And I'm like, Africa is a huge
continent.
It's not a country.
I feel Zambian, and then I feel
American.
Those are my identities, even
though, technically,
I am an alien in this country,
and, when I
go back to Zambia, I don't
exactly fit in
there either.
And I realized that I could use
this to my
advantage, that you can actually
leverage
being an outsider in order to be
the most
unique and be the biggest voice
in the room,
and bring a new perspective to
things that
everybody else takes for
granted.
My name is Namwali Serpell, and
this is my
Brief But Spectacular take on
being an alien.
HARI SREENIVASAN: You can find
more of our
Brief But Spectacular videos
online at
PBS.org/NewsHour/Brief.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening
with Mark Shields and David
Brooks.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and we will see you soon.